Add aggregate functionality for base layers (#384)
posit-dev/ggsql: doc/syntax/clause/draw.qmd

#### Position
A special setting is `position` which controls how overlapping objects are repositioned to avoid overlapping etc. Position adjustments have special mapping requirements so all position adjustments will not be relevant for all layer types. Different layers have different defaults as detailed in their documentation. You can read about each different position adjustment at [their own documentation sites](../index.qmd#position-adjustments).

> #### Aggregate

Reviewer: Can we have `#####`-level headers for section like 'setting aggregates', 'aggregate functions' and 'interactions' or something of the sort?

> Some layers support aggregation of their data through the `aggregate` setting. These layers will state this. `aggregate` collapses each group to a single row, replacing every numeric mapping in place with its aggregated value. Groups are defined by `PARTITION BY` together with all discrete mappings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some layers support aggregation of their data through the `aggregate` setting. Their documentation will state this. `aggregate` collapses each group to a single row, replacing every numeric mapping in place with its aggregated value. Groups are defined by `PARTITION BY` together with all discrete mappings.
```

> The setting takes a single string or an array of strings. Each string is one of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `aggregate` setting takes a single string or an array of strings. Each string is one of:
```

> * **Default** — `'<func>'` (no prefix). With one default the function applies to every untargeted numeric mapping. With two defaults the first is used for the lower side of range layers (e.g. `x`/`xmin`) plus all non-range layers, and the second is used for the upper side of range layers (e.g. `xend`/`xmax`). More than two defaults is an error.

Reviewer: I find 'default' a confusing term here because the default is to have no aggregate. Maybe it should be called 'untargeted' (in which case the order could also be swapped)?

Author: ```suggestion
* **Untargeted** — `'<func>'` (no prefix). With one untargeted aggregation the function applies to every numeric mapping that doesn't have a targeted aggregation. With two untargeted aggregations the first is used for the lower side of range layers (e.g. `x`/`xmin`) plus all non-range layers, and the second is used for the upper side of range layers (e.g. `xend`/`xmax`). More than two untargeted aggregations is an error.
```

> * **Untargeted** — `'<func>'` (no prefix). With one untargeted aggregation the function applies to every numeric mapping that doesn't have a targeted aggregation. With two untargeted aggregations the first is used for the lower side of range layers (e.g. `x`/`xmin`) plus all non-range layers, and the second is used for the upper side of range layers (e.g. `xend`/`xmax`). More than two untargeted aggregations is an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Untargeted** — `'<func>'` (no prefix). With one untargeted aggregation, the function applies to every numeric mapping that doesn't have a targeted aggregation. With two untargeted aggregations, the first is used for the lower side of range layers (e.g. `x`/`xmin`) plus all non-range layers, and the second is used for the upper side of range layers (e.g. `xend`/`xmax`). More than two untargeted aggregations is not allowed.
```

> * **Target** — `'<aes>:<func>'`. Applies `func` to the named aesthetic only (`<aes>` is a user-facing name like `x`, `y`, `xmin`, `xmax`, `xend`, `yend`, `color`, `size`, …). A target overrides any default for that aesthetic.

Author: ```suggestion
* **Targeted** — `'<aes>:<func>'`. Applies `func` to the named aesthetic only (`<aes>` is a user-facing name like `x`, `y`, `xmin`, `xmax`, `xend`, `yend`, `color`, `size`, …). A target overrides any untargeted aggregation for that aesthetic.
```

> * **Targeted** — `'<aes>:<func>'`. Applies `func` to the named aesthetic only (`<aes>` is a user-facing name like `x`, `y`, `xmin`, `xmax`, `xend`, `yend`, `color`, `size`, …). A target overrides any untargeted aggregation for that aesthetic.

Reviewer: I don't think we have introduced the distinction between user-facing and internal names, so let's not hint at it here.
```suggestion
* **Targeted** — `'<aes>:<func>'`. Applies `func` to the named aesthetic only (`<aes>` is a name like `x`, `y`, `xmin`, `xmax`, `xend`, `yend`, `color`, `size`, …). A target overrides any untargeted aggregation for that aesthetic.
```

> A numeric mapping that has neither a target nor an applicable default is dropped from the layer with a warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A numeric mapping is dropped from the layer with a warning, when it has neither a target nor an applicable default .
```

> The simple functions are:

Reviewer: Hasn't been explained at this point what simple/band functions are yet.

* `'count'`: Non-null tally of the bound column.
* `'sum'` and `'prod'`: The sum or product

> * `'min'`, `'max'`, `'range'`, and `'mid'`: Extremes, max - min, and (min + max) / 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `'min'`, `'max'`: Extremes
* `'range'` (max - min), `'mid'` (min + max) / 2
```

* `aggregate => ('y:min', 'y:max', 'color:sum', 'color:prod')` → rows tagged `'min/sum'`, `'max/prod'`.
* `aggregate => ('y:mean', 'y:max', 'color:mean', 'color:prod')` → rows tagged `'mean'`, `'max/prod'` (the duplicate `'mean'` collapses).

> * `aggregate => ('y:min', 'y:max', 'color:median')` → rows tagged `'min'`, `'max'` (the single-function `color` target is recycled across rows and is not part of the label).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `aggregate => ('y:min', 'y:max')` → rows tagged `'min'`, `'max'`.
* `aggregate => ('y:min', 'y:max', 'color:median')` → rows tagged `'min'`, `'max'` (the single-function `color` target is recycled across rows and is not part of the label).
* `aggregate => ('y:min', 'y:max', 'color:sum', 'color:prod')` → rows tagged `'min/sum'`, `'max/prod'`.
* `aggregate => ('y:mean', 'y:max', 'color:mean', 'color:prod')` → rows tagged `'mean'`, `'max/prod'` (the duplicate `'mean'` collapses).

```
Just sorting this on increasing complexity

When several aesthetics are targeted with the same number of functions, they explode in lockstep (row 1 uses each aesthetic's first function, row 2 the second, and so on); aesthetics with a single function — and the unprefixed defaults — are reused unchanged across every row. Mixing different lengths above 1 is an error.

> The simple functions are:

Reviewer: Would it make sense to add a 'constant'-like function when a variable is known to be constant within groups and you want to carry this over aggregation? Or if that would be ill-advised, maybe a 'first' function to just pick up the first value?

Reviewer: Also petitioning for a 'mid' function that is `(min + max) / 2`

Author: I had already added first/last though they are currently DuckDB-only. Since aggregation only applies to numeric columns then most aggregates will yield the constant value, e.g. min/max/median

For band functions you combine an offset with an expansion, potentially multiplied. An example could be `'mean-1.96sdev'` which does exactly what you'd expect it to be. The general form is `<offset>±<multiplier><expansion>` with `<multiplier>` being optional (defaults to `1`).

Allowed offsets are: `'mean'`, `'median'`, `'geomean'`, `'harmean'`, `'rms'`, `'sum'`, `'prod'`, `'min'`, `'max'`, `'mid'`, and `'p05'`–`'p95'`

> Allowed expansions are: `'sdev'`, `'se'`, `'var'`, `'iqr'`, and `'range'`

Reviewer: For overview purposes a table could be nice, but it is not at all necessary
```
| function             | simple | offset | expansion | description                                          |
|----------------------|--------|--------|-----------|------------------------------------------------------|
| `'mean'`, `'median'` | v      | v      | x         | Central tendency.                                    |
| `'sdev'` , `'var'`   | v      | x      | v         | Standard deviation, variance                         |
| `'first'`,`'last'`   | v      | x      | x         | The first or last value in the group ^[**footnote**] |
```

> You can also target the same aesthetic more than once to produce **multiple rows per group** — one for each function. For example `aggregate => ('y:min', 'y:max')` emits a min row and a max row per group, so a single `DRAW line` produces two summary lines that connect within each group rather than across them. When multiple rows are created a synthetic `aggregate` column is made that tags each row with the aggregation function. You can use this with a `REMAPPING` to drive another aesthetic — e.g. `REMAPPING aggregate AS stroke` to colour the two lines differently. The column's value is built from the per-row function names of the *exploded* targets, deduplicated, and joined with `/`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also target the same aesthetic more than once to produce **multiple rows per group** — one for each function. For example `aggregate => ('y:min', 'y:max')` emits a min row and a max row per group, so a single `DRAW line` produces two summary lines that connect within each group rather than across them. When multiple rows are created, a synthetic `aggregate` column is made that tags each row with the name of the aggregation function. You can use this with a `REMAPPING` to drive another aesthetic — e.g. `REMAPPING aggregate AS stroke` to colour the two lines differently. The column's value is built from the per-row function names of the *exploded* targets, deduplicated, and joined with `/`:
```
We haven't introduced at this point what 'exploding' means. Maybe the last line can go to the paragraph at L114?

* `'p05'`, `'p10'`, `'p25'`, `'p50'`, `'p75'`, `'p90'`, and `'p95'`: Percentiles

For band functions you combine an offset with an expansion, potentially multiplied. An example could be `'mean-1.96sdev'` which does exactly what you'd expect it to be. The general form is `<offset>±<multiplier><expansion>` with `<multiplier>` being optional (defaults to `1`).

Allowed offsets are: `'mean'`, `'median'`, `'geomean'`, `'harmean'`, `'rms'`, `'sum'`, `'prod'`, `'min'`, `'max'`, and `'p05'`–`'p95'`

> Allowed expansions are: `'sdev'`, `'se'`, `'var'`, `'iqr'`, and `'range'`

Reviewer: This should come before the explanation of how >1 aggregations interact.

> When several aesthetics are targeted with the same number of functions, they explode in lockstep (row 1 uses each aesthetic's first function, row 2 the second, and so on); aesthetics with a single function — and the unprefixed defaults — are reused unchanged across every row. Mixing different lengths above 1 is an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When several aesthetics are targeted with the same number of functions, they explode in lockstep: row 1 uses each aesthetic's first function, row 2 the second, and so on. Aesthetics with a single function — and the unprefixed defaults — are reused unchanged across every row. Mixing different numbers of aggregation metrics above 1 across aesthetics is not allowed.
```
